docs/lambdas-api.md, before:

# Control API

The gateway exposes REST endpoints for strategy discovery, provider metadata, adapter definitions, and instance lifecycle management. Handlers are mounted alongside control endpoints on port `:8880`.

## Strategy Catalog

### `GET /strategies`
Returns available strategy definitions and their configurable fields.

```json
{
  "strategies": [
    {
      "name": "logging",
      "displayName": "Logging",
      "description": "Emits detailed logs for all inbound events.",
      "config": [
        { "name": "logger_prefix", "type": "string", "description": "Prefix prepended to each log message", "default": "[Logging] ", "required": false }
      ],
      "events": ["Trade", "Ticker", "BookSnapshot", "ExecReport", "KlineSummary", "BalanceUpdate"]
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /strategies/{name}`
Returns the metadata for a single strategy.

## Providers Metadata

### `GET /providers`
Lists all running providers with runtime metadata.

```json
{
  "providers": [
    {
      "name": "binance-spot",
      "exchange": "binance",
      "identifier": "binance",
      "instrumentCount": 342,
      "settings": {
        "api_key": "${BINANCE_API_KEY}",
        "api_secret": "${BINANCE_API_SECRET}",
        "snapshot_depth": 1000,
        "http_timeout": "10s",
        "instrument_refresh_interval": "30m",
        "recv_window": "5s",
        "user_stream_keepalive": "15m"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /providers/{name}`
Returns the detailed metadata, including the current instrument catalogue and underlying adapter definition.

```json
{
  "name": "binance-spot",
  "exchange": "binance",
  "identifier": "binance",
  "instrumentCount": 342,
  "settings": {
    "snapshot_depth": 1000,
    "http_timeout": "10s"
  },
  "instruments": [
    {
      "symbol": "BTC-USDT",
      "baseCurrency": "BTC",
      "quoteCurrency": "USDT",
      "pricePrecision": 2,
      "quantityPrecision": 6
    }
  ],
  "adapter": {
    "identifier": "binance",
    "displayName": "Binance Spot",
    "venue": "BINANCE",
    "capabilities": ["market-data", "orders"],
    "settingsSchema": [
      {"name": "snapshot_depth", "type": "int", "default": 1000, "required": false},
      {"name": "http_timeout", "type": "duration", "default": "10s", "required": false}
    ]
  }
}
```

## Strategy Instances

Instance resources are exposed under `/strategy/instances`.

### `GET /strategy/instances`
Lists all known instances (running or stopped) using a flattened summary payload.

```json
{
  "instances": [
    {
      "id": "latency-probe-btc",
      "strategyIdentifier": "logging",
      "providers": [
        "binance-spot"
      ],
      "aggregatedSymbols": [
        "BTC-USDT"
      ],
      "running": true
    }
  ]
}
```

Each instance summary includes:

- `strategyIdentifier` – name of the registered strategy.
- `providers` – normalized list of providers derived from the scope mapping.
- `aggregatedSymbols` – deduplicated union of symbols across all providers.
- `running` – current execution state.

### `POST /strategy/instances`
Creates a new instance. Instances are persisted in a stopped state; start them explicitly with `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start`.

Request body (minimum fields):
```json
{
  "id": "latency-probe-eth",
  "strategy": {
    "identifier": "logging",
    "config": {
      "logger_prefix": "[LatencyProbe] ",
      "dry_run": true
    }
  },
  "scope": {
    "binance-spot": {
      "symbols": ["ETH-USDT"]
    }
  }
}
```

Responses:
- `201 Created` with the created instance snapshot on success.
- `400 Bad Request` if validation fails or the provider/strategy is invalid/unavailable.

Notes:
- `scope` must supply at least one provider with at least one symbol; providers are inferred from this map.
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start` and `/stop` control runtime execution of a saved instance.

## Instance Item Endpoints

All item endpoints operate on `/strategy/instances/{id}`.

### `GET /strategy/instances/{id}`
Returns the detailed instance snapshot, including strategy configuration and provider scope, or `404` if not found.

```json
{
  "id": "latency-probe-btc",
  "strategy": {
    "identifier": "logging",
    "config": {
      "dry_run": true,
      "logger_prefix": "[LatencyProbe] "
    }
  },
  "providers": [
    "binance-spot"
  ],
  "scope": {
    "binance-spot": {
      "symbols": [
        "BTC-USDT"
      ]
    }
  },
  "aggregatedSymbols": [
    "BTC-USDT"
  ],
  "running": true
}
```

### `PUT /strategy/instances/{id}`
Replaces the configuration and restarts the instance. Provider, symbol, and strategy are immutable and cannot be changed; only `config` can be updated.

### `DELETE /strategy/instances/{id}`
Stops the instance (if running) and removes it from the manager. Returns:

```json
{ "status": "removed", "id": "<id>" }
```

### Actions

Action endpoints accept `POST` only:
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start` – starts a stopped instance (`409` if already running)
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/stop` – stops a running instance (`409` if not running)

## Error Model

Errors use a consistent JSON envelope:

```json
{ "status": "error", "error": "strategy instance not found" }
```

Status codes:
- `400` validation or generic errors
- `404` resource not found
- `409` conflict (exists, already running, not running)
- `405` method not allowed

## Authentication & Transport

## Adapters Metadata

### `GET /adapters`
Returns static metadata for all registered adapters, including supported configuration keys.

```json
{
  "adapters": [
    {
      "identifier": "binance",
      "displayName": "Binance Spot",
      "venue": "BINANCE",
      "capabilities": ["market-data", "orders"],
      "settingsSchema": [
        {"name": "api_key", "type": "string", "required": false},
        {"name": "api_secret", "type": "string", "required": false},
        {"name": "snapshot_depth", "type": "int", "default": 1000, "required": false}
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /adapters/{identifier}`
Returns the metadata for a single adapter.

The API is served over HTTP without authentication by default. Place the gateway behind an ingress or service mesh that enforces TLS and access control as needed.

Commit message:

docs(api): add details on immutable fields and redeployment for strategy instances
- Document error responses for attempts to modify immutable fields in PUT /strategy/instances/{id}
- Add section on redeploying strategy logic, explaining why immutability is enforced for auditing and backtesting

docs/lambdas-api.md, after:

# Control API

The gateway exposes REST endpoints for strategy discovery, provider metadata, adapter definitions, and instance lifecycle management. Handlers are mounted alongside control endpoints on port `:8880`.

## Strategy Catalog

### `GET /strategies`
Returns available strategy definitions and their configurable fields.

```json
{
  "strategies": [
    {
      "name": "logging",
      "displayName": "Logging",
      "description": "Emits detailed logs for all inbound events.",
      "config": [
        { "name": "logger_prefix", "type": "string", "description": "Prefix prepended to each log message", "default": "[Logging] ", "required": false }
      ],
      "events": ["Trade", "Ticker", "BookSnapshot", "ExecReport", "KlineSummary", "BalanceUpdate"]
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /strategies/{name}`
Returns the metadata for a single strategy.

## Providers Metadata

### `GET /providers`
Lists all running providers with runtime metadata.

```json
{
  "providers": [
    {
      "name": "binance-spot",
      "exchange": "binance",
      "identifier": "binance",
      "instrumentCount": 342,
      "settings": {
        "api_key": "${BINANCE_API_KEY}",
        "api_secret": "${BINANCE_API_SECRET}",
        "snapshot_depth": 1000,
        "http_timeout": "10s",
        "instrument_refresh_interval": "30m",
        "recv_window": "5s",
        "user_stream_keepalive": "15m"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /providers/{name}`
Returns the detailed metadata, including the current instrument catalogue and underlying adapter definition.

```json
{
  "name": "binance-spot",
  "exchange": "binance",
  "identifier": "binance",
  "instrumentCount": 342,
  "settings": {
    "snapshot_depth": 1000,
    "http_timeout": "10s"
  },
  "instruments": [
    {
      "symbol": "BTC-USDT",
      "baseCurrency": "BTC",
      "quoteCurrency": "USDT",
      "pricePrecision": 2,
      "quantityPrecision": 6
    }
  ],
  "adapter": {
    "identifier": "binance",
    "displayName": "Binance Spot",
    "venue": "BINANCE",
    "capabilities": ["market-data", "orders"],
    "settingsSchema": [
      {"name": "snapshot_depth", "type": "int", "default": 1000, "required": false},
      {"name": "http_timeout", "type": "duration", "default": "10s", "required": false}
    ]
  }
}
```

## Strategy Instances

Instance resources are exposed under `/strategy/instances`.

### `GET /strategy/instances`
Lists all known instances (running or stopped) using a flattened summary payload.

```json
{
  "instances": [
    {
      "id": "latency-probe-btc",
      "strategyIdentifier": "logging",
      "providers": [
        "binance-spot"
      ],
      "aggregatedSymbols": [
        "BTC-USDT"
      ],
      "running": true
    }
  ]
}
```

Each instance summary includes:

- `strategyIdentifier` – name of the registered strategy.
- `providers` – normalized list of providers derived from the scope mapping.
- `aggregatedSymbols` – deduplicated union of symbols across all providers.
- `running` – current execution state.

### `POST /strategy/instances`
Creates a new instance. Instances are persisted in a stopped state; start them explicitly with `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start`.

Request body (minimum fields):
```json
{
  "id": "latency-probe-eth",
  "strategy": {
    "identifier": "logging",
    "config": {
      "logger_prefix": "[LatencyProbe] ",
      "dry_run": true
    }
  },
  "scope": {
    "binance-spot": {
      "symbols": ["ETH-USDT"]
    }
  }
}
```

Responses:
- `201 Created` with the created instance snapshot on success.
- `400 Bad Request` if validation fails or the provider/strategy is invalid/unavailable.

Notes:
- `scope` must supply at least one provider with at least one symbol; providers are inferred from this map.
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start` and `/stop` control runtime execution of a saved instance.

## Instance Item Endpoints

All item endpoints operate on `/strategy/instances/{id}`.

### `GET /strategy/instances/{id}`
Returns the detailed instance snapshot, including strategy configuration and provider scope, or `404` if not found.

```json
{
  "id": "latency-probe-btc",
  "strategy": {
    "identifier": "logging",
    "config": {
      "dry_run": true,
      "logger_prefix": "[LatencyProbe] "
    }
  },
  "providers": [
    "binance-spot"
  ],
  "scope": {
    "binance-spot": {
      "symbols": [
        "BTC-USDT"
      ]
    }
  },
  "aggregatedSymbols": [
    "BTC-USDT"
  ],
  "running": true
}
```

### `PUT /strategy/instances/{id}`
Replaces the configuration and restarts the instance. Provider, symbol, and strategy are immutable and cannot be changed; only `config` can be updated.

Attempts to modify immutable fields return `400 Bad Request` with descriptive errors:

- `strategy is immutable for <id>` when the strategy identifier changes
- `providers are immutable for <id>` when the provider list changes
- `scope assignments are immutable for <id>` when symbol scope changes

To alter strategy logic or trading instruments, remove the instance (or let context backup restore do so) and create a new one with the desired configuration.

### `DELETE /strategy/instances/{id}`
Stops the instance (if running) and removes it from the manager. Returns:

```json
{ "status": "removed", "id": "<id>" }
```

### Actions

Action endpoints accept `POST` only:
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/start` – starts a stopped instance (`409` if already running)
- `POST /strategy/instances/{id}/stop` – stops a running instance (`409` if not running)

## Error Model

Errors use a consistent JSON envelope:

```json
{ "status": "error", "error": "strategy instance not found" }
```

Status codes:
- `400` validation or generic errors
- `404` resource not found
- `409` conflict (exists, already running, not running)
- `405` method not allowed

### Redeploying Strategy Logic

Strategy type and instrument scope are intentionally fixed after creation. To change either:

1. Stop and delete the existing instance (or allow a context backup restore to remove it automatically).
2. Deploy a replacement instance with the new strategy identifier or scope.

Only strategy parameters (`strategy.config`) are hot-updatable; all other changes must follow a redeploy flow so they can be audited and, if needed, backtested before going live.

## Authentication & Transport

## Adapters Metadata

### `GET /adapters`
Returns static metadata for all registered adapters, including supported configuration keys.

```json
{
  "adapters": [
    {
      "identifier": "binance",
      "displayName": "Binance Spot",
      "venue": "BINANCE",
      "capabilities": ["market-data", "orders"],
      "settingsSchema": [
        {"name": "api_key", "type": "string", "required": false},
        {"name": "api_secret", "type": "string", "required": false},
        {"name": "snapshot_depth", "type": "int", "default": 1000, "required": false}
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### `GET /adapters/{identifier}`
Returns the metadata for a single adapter.

The API is served over HTTP without authentication by default. Place the gateway behind an ingress or service mesh that enforces TLS and access control as needed.
